Right. Are we there? All right, Mr. Heslip, five minutes. Thank you.
In my professional opinion, this legislation is premature. As background, I'm an Emeritus
Professor of Statistics at Massey University. I've been Professor of Statistics at the Australian
National University. I've been a professional, sorry, a professorial fellow in the National
Institute of Balanced Research and Statistics at the University of Willamille. I've worked
internationally for, principally for the United Nations over the last 25 years. If you look
at my submission, I've listed two dozen countries I've worked in. I've worked in government
statistics departments in these places or with them. So my experience is principally
around the methodology. And this, although you have a bill in front of you, the bill actually
is going to be very difficult to bring to fruition in terms of what it's going to
produce because the methodology is underdeveloped. My strong recommendation is that you set up
an expert committee, including international methodologists and not like the State's New
Zealand Committee, which they set up, which contain no methodologist. It contains a
statistician without any experience in official statistics. So what they produced is useful
but inadequate for purpose. So State's New Zealand have plans. And their plans are partly
outlined in the document that they've produced and called Creating Household and Family Information
from Administrative Data, Progress Limitations and the Next Census, March 2026. In it, among
other things, they mention that in terms of being able to match the 2023 census with the
type of administrative data that is available to the present, they are only able to match
households exactly for 50% of the population, half the population. In other words, half
the households are not correct. And you're planning or I don't know whether it's you.
The plan is to move down this path and produce data which is clearly not equivalent to a census.
New Zealand, if it moves in this direction, is completely alone.
There is no country internationally that's doing this. There is moves to use administrative data,
but the idea of using administrative data as a primary source is not used anywhere.
So, brave or foolish, you'll have to decide. But I suggest that you're moving and this bill is
moving prematurely toward something that has been talked about for 20 years internationally
and abandoned in a number of countries. Egg on the face is the risk.
The cost of the census previously, the last two censuses, both government statisticians and
bold resigned. They were not statisticians. They were a government appointees or public service
appointees without skills, the necessary skills to do the job.
They probably didn't listen either. And so the cost overruns in 2023 a result of an appointment.
And they're the result of not listening to some of the expert advice that is in stats,
Professor, can I ask you a question?
So, your contention is that the methodologies flawed. Do you see when you talk about going to a
reference group and doing lots of stuff and basically delaying it? But with all your experience,
do you think the methodology can be made to work that there's a much higher confidence level
rather than 50%, but maybe 90% or whatever? How would you go about improving the methodology?
Or are you just generally opposed to the administration style new approach of using
administration data? I'm not opposed to using administrative data. The current IDI,
integrated data system, has as its backbone, the census, a field based census. And if you take it
out, stats New Zealand will call what they, when you take it out, they'll call what's left a spine.
But the spine is not what I would call a backbone. I know it's choice of words,
attitudes, but it's not a backbone because it doesn't contain the rich information that a census
contains. It's information from different databases at different dates. I know you've got a counting date,
but it's a legal fiction in many ways because the data comes from different databases with
different ages with different quality of information. Okay, so if I am fair from what you
answer there, and I'm not trying to be content, I'm just asking. You're saying without a census
to create the backbone, we're going to have trouble getting reliable data. My point is,
could you see a way of using admin data to create a backbone through better methodology?
That's my real point. I know other countries succeeded yet.
I think it needs more work, and I think that's why I think you need to be
aware of the steps that if you're moving in that direction, the steps you're taking.
Okay, I've got Mr Stevenson. Thanks, Professor. Thanks for your submission.
A quick question. Yeah, obviously, this administrative data is available today.
Have you done or you're aware of any work where it's compared the administrative data
available today via Stats New Zealand and say the last census before that, and what the
variations, how much that aligns? So that was what I was why I mentioned this report from Stats
New Zealand, this creating household and family information through the administrative data,
and why I mentioned that to match the families exactly, they've succeeded only with 50% of
households. Now, one of the consequences of this for the electoral thing is there's a lot of mismatch.
There are households which appear in the administrative data that don't appear in the
census and by some person. This means they're actually counting people is going to be extremely
difficult. Counting people accurately is going to be difficult. Setting electoral boundaries
is going to be very tough. And for those of you who are in Parliament, you are not going to get,
although this is peripheral, I suppose, you're not going to get detailed information about your
electorate anymore. You may get some general information about it, but if you're interested
in subgroups within the electorate, I'm sorry, not there. Yeah, okay. I can't commit.
In terms of the alternative, we've heard that the current census as it is set up at the moment,
maintaining that moving forward is not sustainable. Is that a view that you share,
or do you believe that there would be a way to continue the current model as opposed to using
this administrative data? If you want my professional advice, you'll be ill-advised to
anything other than a field-based census next time round. It would create the time to start
thinking through what it is that's needed if you're going to move to a system that's a little
more like this. But there is no country in the world that doesn't either do a field-based census or
have a register, as they have in Scandinavian countries. We have no register.
Stats New Zealand will claim they have a spine, which is made up of not a register, but a sort of
collection of administrative data sources that have got different IDs and different types of
information, which are mysteriously put together to produce one animal. Despite the fact,
they're really the backbones of three different cats. By register, you mean
some kind of list of every person who's currently in the country? Absolutely,
and that's what Scandinavian countries do. They don't run a field-based census because they can
use that as a backbone or a spine to put the information from the surveys on. In New Zealand,
we're going to do a survey, which is actually not as big as you think it is. It's going
to struggle to give reasonable information for small groups. It's not going to have that
information, either from a register or a field-based census. Yeah, I take the point that you might have
a lot of detail, but it's incorrect to say, isn't it, Professor, that they're not going to do
field surveys. They're just going to do smaller tailored surveys. Yes, I know, but that's a
survey and not a census. It's at most 5% of the population. I mean, what about the other 95% percent?
It can be used to calculate estimates with a given accuracy for large subgroups,
but it's not going to give you detailed information. Certainly not for individuals,
certainly not for groups, for example, within electorates. It's just not going to be possible
anymore. Right, yeah, and I take that point that it's going to be not as much data, but
if you're doing a 60,000 person survey type stuff, the confidence level, what's your
deviation on things like that? Are you saying that can that be seen as representative of the border
data around how many people are in the country, for instance, or what nationality they are,
what ethnicity they are? I think I'll stay away from ethnicity for the moment. That's a whole
half hour. Accept to say that different databases record ethnicity differently when you're trying to
amalgamate them. There's open questions about how you might do that. You say 60,000 people.
In fact, Stats New Zealand will say over the course of five years, they might have 250,000.
So the first question I'd have for you is what period is the supply for? What year does the supply
for is putting five years data together? It's certainly not a counting day. And the other part
of this is that people want information for subgroups, and I'll stay with electorates. Let's say
very roughly 120 electorates. You divide 120 into the 250,000. You now got 2,000 people
over the course of five years. That's 400 a year. You don't get very good accuracy from 400 a year,
even at electorate level. When you look at subgroups, you'll find you're in trouble.
All right. Hey, thank you for your submission. It's been an interesting start to public
submissions on this. Thank you for coming. Thank you. I think I might be unusual,
and most of the people apart from Stats New Zealand who turn up won't have any
psychological comment. Yeah. Thank you. Right. Thank you. Now we're going to Craig.
All right. Mr. Atkinson, are you with us?
Craig, are you there?
All right. Here we go. Good morning. Still morning. We've got five minutes with you.
Yeah. Just one clarification. It's about the electorate boundaries in the
cystistics ones next week. Yeah. We've got different timings. We've got stuff next week
in the following week. Yeah. Oh, yeah. Yeah. You just got the first one just sounding more
about the cystistics than the electorate boundaries. That's how I'm just confirming that. Yeah. So,
yeah, for the electorate boundaries and the altering of what the, I think it's a play straight out
of Mademois Thatcher's playbook, where basically they would remove areas that they'd no votes one
way to a different area just to take the numbers and set the pack of cards before the election
goes. Yeah. I had a very questionable about when it sat in front of the Justice Select Committee,
when you could say you've all got a conflict of interest and that it comes across more.
And I put the word in front of the Justice Select Committee of Dodgy. And so we could rename
you the Dodgy Justice Select Committee because it doesn't come across when you want into all
the boundaries where boundaries are fixed and they stay when you're only doing it for an election
thing. And how it refers to the cystistics, the information that we collect then through
algorithms then gives you about a percentage of what, where people are going to vote. So,
yeah, I think you just, it's an election cycle, isn't it? So that's my submission.
All right. Thank you for that. What I would say to you is that under the previous elections,
and there is a standard approach where there's a electoral commission that looks at the
boundaries and that's assessed every time prior to the election. There's no change
to that situation. And as MPs, we are not involved in that personally. So that's an
outside appointment select process. So that doesn't change under this bill. But that's a different
point. Anyone else got any questions from Mr. Atkinson? All right. Hey, thank you for your
submission this morning. You looked like you're in a sunny place. Sounds great.
Is that right? Yeah. Looks good. Okay. Thank you. Bye-bye.
Now, we have... No, Jasmine. Right. Jasmine Richardson, are you available?
Oh, yeah, of course.
In Met, you could come up into some preparation if you don't mind.
Jasmine, are you with us?
Sorry. Just wait there. Just sit there. Just sit there. Really, just in devotion. Poist.
Poist, yeah. Jasmine, are you there with us? All right, cool.
Good morning. How are you? Your mute is on.
I'm mute. We can hear you. Thank you. We've got five minutes with you. So looking forward to
hearing what you've got to say. Oh, yes. Thank you. I just wanted to, I guess, probably reiterate
what other people have already said. I'm worried about people who go out and are not enrolled,
but want to go and vote on the day or a few days before and won't be able to, if these changes
take effect. I'm worried about that being a lot of young people, Maldives, Pacifica. I guess people
who I feel that I can relate to and believe I would want to know who they would want to...
Oh, I wouldn't want to know, but I would want them to have had their say and tick their box about,
I guess, the people who will lead our country. And yes, that's...
Hey, thank you. Thank you, Jasmine. Unfortunately, I think that what you're
relating, what you're talking about there is not under the electoral boundary,
but actually under the electoral amendment, but it's under the other bill that we're looking at,
and that we've considered. That's for this committee.
But thank you for those comments. Anyone else got any questions for Jasmine?
All right. Thank you very much for a very succinct presentation, but that's good. Good to hear,
and I think everyone recognises the need for democracy to work in practice and in action.
So thank you for those comments. Right. Now, Mr Marshall, you're here with us.
Yes. Yes. Yeah. Hi. Thank you, everyone. Thank you for giving me the opportunity to speak.
I want to talk about the electoral bill. Take up my submission as read.
Reminder submission. There is an underlying malaise of our political system that in the
drawing up of electoral boundaries, not only accentuates, but also entrenched,
the electorate boundaries demarcate, demarcation along lines of economic and political disparity
between the main centres and regions concentrate more political and economic contribution
or power in the cause at the core centres at the expense of the regions.
There has been a gap between the urban centres and regions described by theorists
as the core and periphery, but not just disparity in resources, but also political power.
This becomes even more pronounced at national level and even more so in political contexts.
In this disparity between urban and regional, how well we prosper or even whether our existence
in the future may depend on our ability to better integrate the two parts together,
so that not one party is comparatively worse off. The framework of the unitary state
existent form in New Zealand and we're necessarily, we're necessary expedient,
but in practical terms and under normal conditions, it does not operate towards reconciling the two halves.
Underlying many issues of race, gender, class, there is one common denominator and it is this
dynamic of the stratification insecurity for oneself or one's individual group in any of
these categories, if analysed deeply, has this conflict as its key driver.
Peters Blunley credits the loss at the last election in part as being the inability of the last
government to recognise the needs of the regions, much less listen to them, take the unaffordable
cost of flight travel for regions, no viable solution has been offered, at least from the state, much more
though this threatens to degrade our tradition of liberal democracy. It comes as no surprise that
the last decades, in the last decades, governments and the officials have been hostile to public
planning in terms of some national interest. This exchange of resources becomes political,
urban dwellers may require access to resources from the local region, for the low regional
dweller he faces other challenges in form of increased costs associated with maintaining the
system for the resources and will seek support from the government who is by proxy the urban
dweller. The next point is secondary but still important, how important is it that any system
does not perpetuate itself by being mapped onto existing patterns of existing stratifications of
socio-economic spatial inequality. Both major parties have a political character which favours
interests of different groups. This political tribalism is at the expense of any view of attempted
national interest or common good and that leads us divided and fragmented at best.
The drawing up of any new election must be drawn up along lines of political neutrality which
divert from following the demographic outlines in which these interests could be captured within
the populations inside their borders, boundaries. I fear without more flexibility to apply
a more proportionate system through the design of boundaries
without such measures will lead to further loss of trust between the two sides as it's upshot.
Right thank you very much. I've got a question from Mr Rose Warren.
Now thanks Max, you opened up your contribution to urban regional gap and I was just wondering
what safeguards do you think are necessary to ensure that changes to boundary setting rules
cannot be used to advantage the government of the day?
It's a really difficult one and I think it's a pre-nial question. How do you manage the
problem of majoritarianism where you have voting? Most of your centres, most of your population
is going to be in the main centres and that's been that way since I think the 1960s there was that
shift in 1940 just before the Second World War. So this is a problem that we're going to have
to struggle with but it's a challenge reconciling this problem but that's part of what democracy
is. It's this process. All right hey thank you for a very thoughtful presentation
is a conundrum isn't it because where people seek to live and choose to live I should say
you have natural concentrations which mean economic power and all those other things but
trying to devise something that is fair because there's two sides to that debate you're putting
forward but thank you for that thoughtful presentation. Right Kay Jones where you're there
I see. Thank you. Now we've got a private view as well. Just swapping to a message here.
Thank you our members of the committee. Thank you for the opportunity to appear.
Oh hey Jones. I'm a fifth generation Pākehā New Zealander with Scotland,
Scottish, Shetland and English heritage and with Māori whānau. I understand you've read my
submission. It was very short because I focused more on the data and statistics one
and since that time I've been considering other points. Usually when I present before you
I talk of my own experience and I could talk about working on the local government commission
and going to areas and listening to people presenting on why the boundaries of their areas
should be changed or not for voting purposes but today I would prefer to quote other people
friends friends of friends and from documents that you should have read.
You'll remember the recent apologies that the government gave to survivors of abuse
and state care. Survivors describe their feelings thus we have been disconnected from our being
like a stranger in our country alienated from family and heritage born into a world innocent
and free oblivious to systemic behavior which has denied and exhausted and extinguished our flame of
hope. In his apology Prime Minister Luxon said many of you were denied knowledge of what
happened to you because record keeping during your time in care was so poor or deliberately
inaccurate your own personal information was often withheld destroyed lost or wrong or
incomplete often there was no record of your ethnic origins your family and far now the harm you
experienced the complaints you made your medical treatments or what social workers said about you.
Labour leader Chris Hipkins said Maori survivors themselves found themselves in a system that
inherently worked against them and in care settings that were blatantly racist suffering
severe abuse. Many Maori survivors were made to feel for karma shame it having been stripped of
their identity as Maori. Whakapapa and Nanamahotahaki were transgressed and people were severed from
their far now and when we go on to look at for example the NGOs that were advising
um survivors on appearing and putting their testimony they recorded okay we're talking about
the electoral boundaries precisely record keeping not being consistent when we're talking about
a system of recognizing for the purposes of defining electoral votes somebody been
on the Maori role they first must know that they are Maori they must be able to prove that they must
be able to go on to that role I have heard from Rangatahi of the Koro who was uplifted as a child
and who has no factual basis for being on the Maori role they are visibly Maori in terms of
how we perceive that but they do not have that accurate data now in a census they can
I self-identify but when it comes to administrative data they are erased now this is part of a process
of disenfranchisement if people have difficulty getting on to a role then that takes away their
right to be voting that area if there is already a large population of Maori that would be enough
to justify an eighth electoral seat and you are by postponing that for another five or more years
you are also reducing you're saying these votes have less value than those of people on the general
role so it is a push for Rangatahi registering for the first time or people considering I've never
voted before and I'm in my 50s but maybe I will this time when they make that choice of
whether to be on the general or the Maori role knowing that their vote is actually going to be
counted more if they're on the general may make a difference or it may make them so
disillusioned angered whatever the emotional import of being seen as less and being excluded
so my reasons for referring back to the survivors and states care system is because it was not
just abuse of people's physical and emotional well-being it was also an attack on their whakapapa
their connections to their identity and their ability to prove that and this bill does the same
thing through the process that has been imposed to say we will count less we will defer we will
delay we will not count people I'll stop there in case there's any questions I've got a question
from mr brother thank you and thank you k 0.6 of yours mission says the effects would be to
restrict the representation of all mighty role voters until 2032 or later however between now
and the boundaries review that just concluded last year if there was no change there wouldn't have
been any change to the prospective boundaries or mighty representation or general electorates
but before 2032 anyway so how does this bill go about impacting on that well this bill says it
will delay the count and if we've if the if census happened quickly and there was the count happening
then that would be one of the factors so I haven't got all the details in front of me but I know
that when people say oh we will delay something for this period of time I'm a former public
servant saying oh we'll delay it till 2028 means it won't actually happen to 2032 the the delays in
implicit in the system mean that less attention will be given to that and of course we've also got
those other factors that are causing disenfranchisement like the removal of voting rights for prisoners
which if you are denied the right of that doesn't have anything to say if you can't just take one
element question all right because it doesn't have anything to do with this bill um what is changing
through this piece of legislation that if it weren't brought in would impact mighty representation for
the 2032 election because the next boundary review following what would have been the next census
would have also changed for the 2032 election so what is changing well for one thing what is
changing is the messaging from government about who counts and who gets to vote okay all right he
thank you um yet again for presenting to the committee um and taking the time to turn up today
oh well I'll perhaps be able to answer more questions on this next week when I come back
to the down to statistics bill right okay thank you now I'm going to I have to ask um public members
professor and who others um mr. Marshall as well could you please leave the room we're going to go
into a private session but thank you for all three of you for your contributions this morning
thank you I hope you didn't teach me stats at Massey University
all right cool
you